The Battle of Monte Cassino (also known as the Battle for Rome the Battle for Cassino) was a costly series of four assaults by the Allies against the Winter Line in Italy held by Axis forces during the Italian Campaign of World War II. The intention was a breakthrough to Rome.
At the beginning of 1944, the western half of the Winter Line was being anchored by Germans holding the Rapido, Liri, Garigliano valleys some of the surrounding peaks ridges. Together, these features formed the Gustav Line. Monte Cassino, a historic hilltop abbey founded in AD 529 by Benedict of Nursia, dominated the nearby town of Cassino the entrances to the Liri Rapido valleys. Lying in a protected historic zone, it had been left unoccupied by the Germans. They had, however, manned some positions set into the steep slopes below the abbey's walls.
Repeated pinpoint artillery attacks on Allied assault troops caused their leaders to conclude the abbey was being used by the Germans as an observation post, at the least. Fears escalated along with casualties, in spite of a lack of clear evidence, it was marked for destruction. On 15 February American bombers dropped 1,400 tons of high explosives, creating widespread damage. The raid failed to achieve its objective, as German paratroopers occupied the rubble established excellent defensive positions amid the ruins. Between 17 January 18 May, Monte Cassino the Gustav defences were assaulted four times by Allied troops, the last involving twenty divisions attacking along a twenty-mile front.
The German defenders were finally driven from their positions, but at a high cost. The capture of Monte Cassino tolled some 55,000 Allied casualties, with German losses being estimated at around 20,000 killed wounded.



The Allied landings in Italy in September 1943 by two Allied armies commanded by General Sir Harold Alexander, Commander-in-Chief Allied Armies in Italy, were followed by an advance northward on two fronts, one on each side of the central mountain range forming the "spine" of Italy. On the western front, U.S. Fifth Army, commanded by Lieutenant-General Mark W. Clark, moved from the main base of Naples up the Italian "boot", in the east General Sir Bernard Montgomery's British Eighth Army advanced up the Adriatic coast.
Fifth Army made slow progress in the face of difficult terrain, wet weather skillful German defences. The Germans were fighting from a series of prepared positions in a manner designed to inflict maximum damage, then pulling back while buying time for the construction of the Winter Line defensive positions south of Rome. The original estimates that Rome would fall by October 1943 proved far too optimistic.
Although in the east the German defensive line had been breached on Eighth Army's Adriatic front Ortona was captured, the advance had ground to a halt with the onset of winter blizzards at the end of December, making close air support movement in the jagged terrain impossible. The route to Rome from the east using Route 5 was thus excluded as a viable option leaving the routes from Naples to Rome, highways 6 7, as the only possibilities; highway 7 (the old Roman Appian Way) followed along the west coast but south of Rome ran into the Pontine Marshes, which the Germans had flooded.
Highway 6 ran through the Liri valley, dominated at its south entrance by the rugged mass of Monte Cassino above the town of Cassino. Excellent observation from the peaks of several hills allowed the German defenders to detect Allied movement direct highly accurate artillery fire, preventing any northward advance. Running across the Allied line was the fast flowing Rapido River, which rose in the central Apennine mountains, flowed through Cassino across the entrance to the Liri valley. There the Liri river joined the Rapido to form the Garigliano River, which continued on to the sea.
With its heavily fortified mountain defences, difficult river crossings, valley head flooded by the Germans, Cassino formed a linchpin of the Gustav Line, the most formidable line of the defensive positions making up the Winter Line.
In spite of its potential excellence as an observation post, of the fourteen century old Benedictine abbey's historical significance, the German commander-in-chief in Italy, Field Marshal Albert Kesselring, ordered German units not to include it in their defensive positions, informed the Vatican the Allies accordingly in December 1943.
Nevertheless, some Allied reconnaissance aircraft maintained they observed German troops inside the monastery. While this remains unconfirmed, it is clear that once the monastery was destroyed it was occupied by the Germans proved better cover for their emplacements troops than an intact structure would have offered.







The plan of U.S. Fifth Army commander General Clark was for British X Corps, on the left of a thirty-kilometer (20 mi) front, to attack on January 17, 1944, across the Garigliano near the coast (British 5th 56th (London) Division). British 46th Infantry Division was to attack on the night of January 19 across the Garigliano below its junction with the Liri in support of the main attack by U.S. II Corps on their right. The main central thrust by U.S. II Corps would commence on January 20 with 36th (Texas) U.S. Infantry Division making an assault across the swollen Rapido river five miles (8 km) downstream of Cassino. Simultaneously the French Expeditionary Corps, under General Alphonse Juin would continue its "right hook" move towards Monte Cairo, the hinge to the Gustav Hitler defensive lines. In truth, Clark did not believe there was much chance of an early breakthrough, but he felt that the attacks would draw German reserves away from the Rome area in time for the attack on Anzio where U.S. VI Corps (British 1st U.S. 3rd Infantry Division) was due to make an amphibious landing on January 22. It was hoped that the Anzio landing, with the benefit of surprise a rapid move inlto the Alban Hills, which commboth routes 6 7, would so threaten the Gustav defenders' rear supply lines that it might just unsettle the German commanders cause them to withdraw from the Gustav Line to positions north of Rome. Whilst this would have been consistent with the German tactics of the previous three months, Allied intelligence had not understood that the strategy of fighting retreat had been for the sole purpose of providing time to prepthe Gustav line where the Germans intended to stfirm. The intelligence assessment of Allied prospects was therefore over-optimistic.
Fifth Army had only reached the Gustav line on January 15, having taken six weeks of heavy fighting to advance the last seven miles (11 km) through the Bernhardt Line positions during which time they had sustained 16,000 casualties. They hardly had time to prepthe new assault, let alone take the rest reorganization they really needed after three months of attritional fighting north from Naples. However, the Allied Chiefs of Staff would only make landing craft available until early February, the Anzio landing had to take place in late January with the coordinated attack on the Gustav line some three days earlier.



The first assault was made on January 17. Near the coast, British X Corps (56th 5th Divisions) forced a crossing of the Garigliano (followed some two days later by British 46th Division on their right) causing General von Senger, commander of German XIV Panzer Corps responsible for the Gustav defences on the south western half of the line, some serious concern as to the ability of the German 94th Infantry Division to hold the line. Responding to Senger's concerns, Kesselring ordered the 29th 90th Panzer Grenadier Divisions from the Rome area to provide reinforcement. There is some speculation as to what might have been if X Corps had had the reserves available to exploit their success make a decisive breakthrough. The corps did not have the extra men, but there would certainly have been time to alter the overall battle plan cancel or modify the central attack by U.S. II Corps to make men available to force the issue in the south before the German reinforcements were able to get into position. As it happened, Fifth Army HQ failed to appreciate the frailty of the German position, the plan was unchanged. The two divisions from Rome arrived by January 21 stabilized the German position in the south. In one respect, however, the plan was working in that Kesselring's reserves had been drawn south. The three divisions of X Corps sustained 4,000 casualties during the period of the first battle.



The central thrust by U.S. 36th Division commenced three hours after sunset on January 20. The lack of time to prepmeant that the approach to the river was still hazardous due to uncleared mines booby traps, the highly technical business of an opposed river crossing lacked the necessary planning rehearsal. Although a battalion of the 143rd Regiment was able to get across the Rapido on the south side of San Angelo two companies of the 141st Regiment on the north side, they were isolated for most of the time, at no time was Allied armour able to get across the river, leaving them highly vulnerable to counterattacking tanks self-propelled guns of General Eberhard Rodt's 15th Panzer Grenadier Division. The southern group was forced back across the river by mid-morning of January 21. Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Keyes, commanding II Corps, pressed Maj. Gen. Fred Walker of 36th Division to renew the attack immediately. Once again the two regiments attacked but with no more success against the well dug-in 15th Panzer Grenadier Division: 143rd Regiment got the equivalent of two battalions across, but once again there was no armoured support, they were devastated when daylight came the next day. The 141st Regiment also crossed in two battalion strength, despite the lack of armoured support managed to advance 1 km (0.62 mi). However, with the coming of daylight, they too were cut down, by the evening of January 22 the regiment had virtually ceased to exist; only 40 men made it back to the Allied lines. Rick Atkinson described the intense German resistance:

Artillery Nebelwerfer drumfire methodically searched both bridgeheads, while machine guns opened on every sound... GIs inched forward, feeling for trip wires listening to German gun crews reload... to stor even to kneel was to die... On average, soldiers wounded on the Rapido received "definitive treatment" nine hours forty-one minutes after they were hit, a medical study later found..." 

The assault had been a costly failure, with 36th Division losing 2,100 men killed, wounded missing in 48 hours.



The next attack was launched on January 24. The U.S. II Corps, with 34th Infantry Division under Maj. Gen. Charles W. Ryder spearheading the attack French colonial troops on its right flank, launched an assault across the flooded Rapido valley north of Cassino into the mountains behind with the intention of then wheeling to the left attacking Monte Cassino from high ground. Whilst the task of crossing the river would be easier in that the Rapido upstream of Cassino was fordable, the flooding made movement on the approaches each side very difficult. In particular, armour could only move on paths laid with steel matting, it took eight days of bloody fighting across the waterlogged ground for 34th Division to push back General Franek's 44th Infantry Division to establish a foothold in the mountains.



On the right, the Moroccan-French troops made good initial progress against the German 5th Mountain Division, commanded by General Julius Ringel, gaining positions on the slopes of their key objective, Monte Cifalco. Forward units of the 3rd Algerian Division had also by-passed Monte Cifalco to capture Monte Belvedere Colle Abate. General Juin was convinced that Cassino could be bypassed the German defences unhinged by this northerly route but his request for reserves to maintain the momentum of his advance was refused the one available reserve regiment (from 36th Division) was sent to reinforce 34th Division. By January 31 the French had ground to a halt with Monte Cifalco, which had a clear view of the French U.S. flanks supply lines, still in German hands. The two Moroccan-French divisions sustained 2,500 casualties in their struggles around Monte Belvedere.



It became U.S. 34th Division's task (joined by 142nd Regiment of 36th Division) to fight southward along the linked hilltops towards the intersecting ridge on the south end of which was Monastery Hill. They could then break through down into the Liri valley behind the Gustav Line defences. It was very tough going: the mountains were rocky, strewn with boulders cut by ravines gullies. Digging foxholes on the rocky ground was out of the question, each feature was exposed to fire from surrounding high points. The ravines were no better since the gorse growing there, far from giving cover, had been sown with mines, booby-traps hidden barbed wire by the defenders. The Germans had had three months to preptheir defensive positions using dynamite to stockpile ammunition stores. There was no natural shelter, the weather was wet freezing cold.
By early February, American infantry had captured a strategic point near the hamlet of San Onofrio, less than a mile from the abbey, by February 7 a battalion had reached Point 445, a round top hill immediately below the monastery no more than 400 yards (370 m) away. An American squad managed a reconnaissance right up against the cliff-like abbey walls, with the monks observing German American patrols exchanging fire. However, attempts to take Monte Cassino were broken by overwhelming machine gun fire from the slopes below the monastery. Despite their fierce fighting, the 34th Division managed to take the final redoubts on Hill 593 (known to the Germans as Calvary Mount), held by the 3rd battalion of the German 2nd Parachute Regiment, the dominating point of the ridge to the monastery.



On February 11, after a final unsuccessful 3-day assault on Monastery Hill Cassino town, the Americans were withdrawn. U.S. II Corps, after two a half weeks of torrid battle, was fought out. The performance of 34th Division in the mountains is considered to rank as one of the finest feats of arms carried out by any soldiers during the war. In return they sustained losses of about 80% in the Infantry battalions, some 2,200 casualties.
At the height of the battle in the first days of February General von Senger und Etterlin had moved 90th Division from the Garigliano front to north of Cassino had been so alarmed at the rate of attrition, he had "...mustered all the weight of my authority to request that the Battle of Cassino should be broken off that we should occupy a quite new line. ... a position, in fact, north of the Anzio bridgehead". Kesselring refused the request. At the crucial moment von Senger was able to throw in the 71st Infantry Division whilst leaving 15th Panzer Grenadiers (whom they had been due to relieve) in place.
During the battle there had been occasions when, with more astute use of reserves, promising positions might have been turned into decisive moves. Some historians suggest this failure to capitalize on initial success could be put down to General Clark's lack of experience. However, it is more likely that he just had too much to do, being responsible for both the Cassino Anzio offensives. This view is supported by General Truscott's inability, as related below, to get hold of him for discussions at a vital juncture of the Anzio breakout at the time of the fourth Cassino battle. Whilst General Alexander chose (for perfectly logical co-ordination arguments) to have Cassino Anzio under a single army commander splitting the Gustav line front between U.S. Fifth Army British Eighth Army, Kesselring chose to create a separate Fourteenth Army under Gen. Eberhard von Mackensen to fight at Anzio whilst leaving the Gustav line in the sole hands of Gen. Heinrich von Vietinghoff's Tenth Army.
The withdrawn American units were replaced by the New ZealCorps (2nd New ZealDivision 4th Indian Division) from the British Eighth Army on the Adriatic front. The New ZealCorps was commanded by Lt. Gen. Bernard Freyberg.






With U.S. VI Corps under heavy threat at Anzio, Freyberg was under equal pressure to launch a relieving action at Cassino. Once again, therefore, the battle commenced without the attackers being fully prepared. As well, Corps HQ did not fully appreciate the difficulty in getting 4th Indian Infantry Division into place in the mountains supplying them on the ridges valleys north of Cassino (using mules across 7 miles (11 km) of goat tracks over terrain in full view of the monastery, exposed to accurate artillery fire   hence the naming of Death Valley). This was evidenced in the writing of Maj. Gen. Howard Kippenberger, commander of New Zeal2nd Division, after the war:

Poor Dimoline (Brigadier Dimoline, acting commander of 4th Indian Division) was having a dreadful time getting his division into position. I really appreciated the difficulties until I went over the ground after the war.

Freyberg's plan was a continuation of the first battle: an attack from the north along the mountain ridges an attack from the southeast along the railway line to capture the railway station across the Rapido less than a mile south of Cassino town. Success would pinch out Cassino town open up the Liri valley. However, Freyberg had informed his superiors that he believed, given the circumstances, there was no better than a 50% chance of success for the offensive.



Increasingly, the opinions of certain Allied officers were fixed on the great abbey of Monte Cassino: in their view it was the abbey its presumed use as a German artillery observation point that prevented the breach of the  Gustav Line'.
The British press C. L. Sulzberger of The New York Times frequently convincingly in (often manufactured) detail wrote of German observation posts artillery positions inside the abbey. The commander in chief of the Mediterranean Allied Air Forces Lieutenant General Ira C. Eaker accompanied by Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers (deputy to General Sir Henry MaitlWilson, the Supreme Allied Commander of the Mediterranean Theater) personally observed during a fly-over  a radio mast [...] German uniforms hanging on a clothesline in the abbey courtyard; [and] machine gun emplacements 50 yards (46 m) from the abbey walls.  Countering this, Major General Geoffrey Keyes of U.S. II Corps also flew over the monastery several times, reporting to Fifth Army G-2 he had seen no evidence the Germans were in the abbey. When informed of others' claims of having seen enemy troops there, he stated:  They ve been looking so long they re seeing things."
Major General Kippenberger of the New ZealCorps HQ held it was their view the monastery was probably being used as the German's main vantage point for artillery spotting, since it was so perfectly situated for it no army could refrain. There is no clear evidence it was, but he went on to write that from a military point of view it was immaterial:

If not occupied today, it might be tomorrow it did not appear it would be difficult for the enemy to bring reserves into it during an attack or for troops to take shelter there if driven from positions outside. It was impossible to ask troops to storm a hill surmounted by an intact building such as this, capable of sheltering several hundred infantry in perfect security from shellfire ready at the critical moment to emerge counter-attack. ... Undamaged it was a perfect shelter but with its narrow windows level profiles an unsatisfactory fighting position. Smashed by bombing it was a jagged heap of broken masonry debris open to effective fire from guns, mortars strafing planes as well as being a death trap if bombed again. On the whole I thought it would be more useful to the Germans if we left it unbombed.

Major General Francis Tuker, whose 4th Indian Division would have the task of attacking Monastery Hill, had made his own appreciation of the situation. In the absence of detailed intelligence at Fifth Army HQ, he had found a book dated 1879 in a Naples bookshop giving details of the construction of the abbey. In his memorandum to Freyberg he concluded that regardless of whether the monastery was currently occupied by the Germans, it should be demolished to prevent its effective occupation. He also pointed out that with 150 foot (45 m) high walls made of masonry at least 10 feet (3 m) thick, there was no practical means for field engineers to deal with the place, that bombing with "blockbuster" bombs would be the only solution since 1,000 pound bombs would be "next to useless". Tuker said he could not be induced to attack unless "the garrison was reduced to helpless lunacy by sheer unending pounding for days nights by air artillery".
On February 11, 1944, the acting commander of 4th Indian Division, Brigadier Harry Dimoline, requested a bombing raid. Tuker reiterated again his case from a hospital bed in Caserta, where he was suffering a severe attack of a recurrent tropical fever. Freyberg transmitted his request on February 12. The request, however, was greatly expanded by air force planners, probably supported by Ira Eaker Jacob Devers, who sought to use the opportunity to showcase the abilities of U.S. Army air power to support ground operations. Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark of Fifth Army his chief of staff Major General Alfred Gruenther remained unconvinced of the  military necessity . When handing over the U.S. II Corps position to the New ZealCorps, Brigadier General J.A. Butler, deputy commander of U.S. 34th Division, had said "I don't know, but I don't believe the enemy is in the convent. All the fire has been from the slopes of the hill below the wall". Finally Clark, "who did not want the monastery bombed," pinned down the Commander-in-Chief Allied Armies in Italy, General Sir Harold Alexander to take the responsibility: "I said, 'You give me a direct order we ll do it,' he did."
The bombing mission in the morning of February 15, 1944 involved 142 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses heavy bombers followed by 47 North American B-25 Mitchell 40 Martin B-26 Marauder medium bombers. In all they dropped 1,150 tons of high explosives incendiary bombs on the abbey, reducing the entire top of Monte Cassino to a smoking mass of rubble. Between bomb runs, the II Corps artillery pounded the mountain. Many Allied soldiers war correspondents cheered as they observed the spectacle. Eaker Devers watched; Juin was heard to remark  ... no, they ll get anywhere this way.  Clark Gruenther refused to be on the scene stayed at their headquarters. That same afternoon the next day an aggressive follow-up of artillery a raid by 59 fighter bombers wreaked further destruction. The German positions on Point 593 above behind the monastery were untouched.
Damningly, the air raid had not been coordinated with ground commands, an immediate infantry follow-up failed to materialize. Its timing had been driven by the Air Force regarding it as a separate operation, considering the weather requirements on other fronts theaters without reference to ground forces. Many of the troops had only taken over their positions from U.S. II Corps two days previous, besides the difficulties in the mountains, preparations in the valley had also been held up by difficulties in supplying the newly installed troops with sufficient material for a full-scale assault of incessantly foul weather, flooding, waterlogged ground. As a result, Indian troops on the Snake's Head were taken by surprise, while the New ZealCorps was two days away from being ready to launch their main assault.



Pope Pius XII was silent after the bombing; however, his Cardinal Secretary of State, Luigi Maglione, bluntly stated to the senior U.S. diplomat to the Vatican, Harold Tittmann, that the bombing was  a colossal blunder . . . a piece of a gross stupidity. 

It is certain from every investigation that followed since the event that the only people killed in the monastery by the bombing were 230 Italian civilians seeking refuge in the abbey. There is no evidence that the bombs dropped on the Monte Cassino monastery that day ever killed any German troops. However, given the imprecision of bombing in those days (it was estimated that only 10% of the bombs from the heavy bombers, bombing from high altitude, hit the monastery) bombs did fall elsewhere killed German Allied troops alike, although that would have been unintended. Indeed, sixteen bombs hit the Fifth Army compound at Presenzano 17 miles (27 km) from Monte Cassino exploded only yards away from the trailer where Gen. Clark was doing paperwork at his desk.
On the day after the bombing at first light, most of the civilians still alive fled the ruins. Only about 40 people remained: the six monks who survived in the deep vaults of the abbey, their 79-year-old abbot, Gregorio Diamare, three tenant farmer families, orphaned or abandoned children, the badly wounded the dying. After artillery barrages, renewed bombing attacks on the ridge by 4th Indian Division, the monks decided to leave their ruined home with the others who could move at 07:30 on February 17. The old abbot was leading the group down the mule path toward the Liri valley, reciting the rosary. After they arrived at a German first-aid station, some of the badly wounded who had been carried by the monks were taken away in a military ambulance. After meeting with a German officer, the monks were driven to the monastery of Sant'Anselmo. On February 18, the abbot met the commander of XIV Panzer Corps, Lieutenant-General Fridolin von Senger und Etterlin. One monk, Carlomanno Pellagalli, returned to the abbey; when he was later seen wandering the ruins, the German paratroopers thought he was a ghost. After April 3, he was not seen anymore.
It is now known that the Germans had an agreement not to use the abbey for military purposes. Following its destruction, paratroopers of the German 1st Parachute Division then occupied the ruins of the abbey turned it into a fortress observation post, which became a serious problem for the attacking allied forces.



On the night following the bombing, a company of the 1st Battalion, Royal Sussex Regiment (one of the British elements in 4th Indian Division) serving in 7th Indian Infantry Brigade attacked the key point 593 from their position 70 yards (64 m) away on Snakeshead Ridge. The assault failed, with the company sustaining 50% casualties.
The following night the Royal Sussex Regiment was ordered to attack in battalion strength. There was a calamitous start. Artillery could not be used in direct support targeting point 593 of the proximity risk of shelling friendly troops. It was planned therefore to shell point 575 which had been providing supporting fire to the defenders of point 593. The topography of the lmeant that shells fired at 575 had to pass very low over Snakeshead ridge, in the event some fell among the gathering assault companies. After reorganising, the attack went in at midnight. The fighting was brutal often hto hand, but the determined defence held the Royal Sussex battalion was beaten off, once again sustaining over 50% casualties. Over the two nights, the Royal Sussex Regiment lost 12 out of 15 officers 162 out of 313 men who took part in the attack.

On the night of February 17 the main assault took place. The 4/6th Rajputana Rifles would take on the assault of point 593 along Snakeshead Ridge with the depleted Royal Sussex Regiment held in reserve. 1/9th Gurkha Rifles was to attack Point 444. In the meantime, the 1/2nd Gurkha Rifles were to sweep across the slopes ravines in a direct assault on the monastery. This latter was across appalling terrain, but it was hoped that the Gurkhas, from the Himalayas so expert in mountain terrain, would succeed. This proved a faint hope. Once again the fighting was brutal, but no progress was made casualties heavy. The Rajputanas lost 196 officers men, the 1/9th Gurkhas 149 the 1/2nd Gurkhas 96. It became clear that the attack had failed, on February 18 Brigadier Dimoline Freyberg called off the attacks on Monastery Hill.
In the other half of the main assault the two companies from 28th (M ori) Battalion from the New ZealDivision forced a crossing of the Rapido attempted to gain the rail road station in Cassino town. The intention was to take a perimeter that would allow engineers to build a causeway for armoured support. Nevertheless, with the aid of a near constant smoke screen laid down by Allied artillery that obscured their location to the German batteries on Monastery Hill, the M ori were able to hold their positions for much of the day. Their isolation lack of both armoured support anti-tank guns made for a hopeless situation, however, when an armoured counterattack came in the afternoon on February 18. They were ordered to pull back to the river when it became clear to headquarters that both the attempts to break through (in the mountains along the causeway) would not succeed. It had been very close. The Germans had been very alarmed by the capture of the station and, from a conversation on record between Kesselring Tenth Army commander Gen. von Vietinghoff, had not expected their counterattack to succeed.






For the third battle, it was decided that whilst the winter weather persisted, fording the Rapido downstream of Cassino town was an unattractive option (after the unhappy experiences in the first two battles). The "right hook" in the mountains had also been a costly failure, it was decided to launch twin attacks from the north along the Rapido valley: one towards the fortified Cassino town the other towards Monastery Hill. The idea was to clear the path through the bottleneck between these two features to allow access towards the station on the south so to the Liri valley. British 78th Infantry Division, which had arrived in late February placed under the commof New ZealCorps, would then cross the Rapido downstream of Cassino start the push to Rome.
None of the Allied commanders were very happy with the plan, but it was hoped that an unprecedented preliminary bombing by heavy bombers would prove the trump. Three clear days of good weather were required for twenty one successive days the assault was postponed as the troops waited in the freezing wet positions for a favourable weather forecast. Matters were not helped by the loss of Major General Kippenberger, commanding 2 New ZealDivision, wounded by an anti-personnel mine losing both his feet. He was replaced by Brigadier Graham Parkinson. Meanwhile, a German counterattack at Anzio had failed been called off.



The third battle began March 15. After a bombardment of 750 tons of 1,000-pound bombs with delayed action fuses, starting at 08:30 lasting three a half hours, the New Zealanders advanced behind a creeping artillery barrage from 746 artillery pieces. Success depended on taking advantage of the paralysing effect of the bombing. The bombing was not concentrated   only 50% landed a mile or less from the target point 8% within 1,000 yards but between it the shelling about half the 300 paratroopers in the town had been killed. The defences rallied more quickly than expected, the Allied armour was held up by bomb craters. Nevertheless success was there for the New Zealanders' taking, but by the time a follow-up assault on the left had been ordered that evening it was too late: defences had reorganised, more critically, the rain, contrary to forecast, had started again. Torrents of rain flooded bomb craters, turned rubble into a morass blotted out communications, the radio sets being incapable of surviving the constant immersion. The dark rain clouds also blotted out the moonlight, hindering the task of clearing routes through the ruins. On the right, the New Zealanders had captured Castle Hill point 165, as planned, elements of Indian 4th Infantry Division, now commanded by Major General Alexander Galloway, had passed through to attack point 236 thence to point 435, Hangman's Hill. In the confusion of the fight, a company of the 1/9th Gurkha Rifles had taken a track avoiding point 236 captured point 435 whilst the assault on point 236 by the 1/6th Rajputana Rifles had been beaten off.
By the end of March 17 the Gurkhas held Hangman's Hill (point 435), 250 yards (230 m) from the monastery, in battalion strength (although their lines of supply were compromised by the German positions at point 236 in the northern part of the town), whilst the town was still fiercely defended, New Zealunits armour had got through the bottleneck captured the station. However, the Germans were still able to reinforce their troops in the town were proving adept at slipping snipers back into parts of the town that had supposedly been cleared.

March 19 was planned for the decisive blow in the town on the monastery, including a surprise attack by tanks of 20th Armoured Brigade working their way along the track ("Cavendish Road") from Caira to Albaneta Farm (which had been prepared by engineer units under the cover of darkness) from there towards the abbey. However, a surprise fiercely pressed counterattack from the monastery on Castle Hill by the German 1st Parachute Division completely disrupted any possibility of an assault on the monastery from the Castle Hangman's Hill whilst the tanks, lacking infantry support, were all knocked out by mid-afternoon. In the town the attackers made little progress, overall the initiative was passing to the Germans whose positions close to Castle Hill, which was the gateway to the position on Monastery Hill, crippled any prospects of early success.
On 20 March Freyberg committed elements of 78th Infantry Division to the battle; firstly to provide a greater troop presence in the town so that cleared areas would not be reinfiltrated by the Germans, secondly to reinforce Castle Hill to allow troops to be released to close off the two routes between Castle Hill Points 175 165 being used by the Germans to reinforce the defenders in the town. The Allied commanders felt they were on the brink of success as grim fighting continued through 21 March. However, the defenders were resolute the attack on Point 445 to block the German reinforcement route had narrowly failed whilst in the town Allied gains were measured only house by house.
On 23 March Alexander met with his commanders. A range of opinions were expressed as to the possibility of victory but it was evident that the New ZealIndian Divisions were exhausted. Freyberg was convinced that the attack could not continue he called it off. The German 1st Parachute Division had taken a mauling, but had held.



The next three days were spent stabilizing the front, extracting the isolated Gurkhas from Hangman's Hill the detachment from New Zeal24 Battalion which had held Point 202 in similar isolation. The Allied line was reorganised with the exhausted 4th Indian Division 2 New ZealDivision withdrawn replaced respectively in the mountains by British 78th Division in the town by British 1st Guards Brigade. The New ZealCorps headquarters was dissolved on 26 March control was assumed by British XIII Corps. In their time on the Cassino front line 4th Indian Division had lost 3,000 men the New ZealDivision 1,600 men killed, missing wounded.
The German defenders too had paid a heavy price. The German XIV Corps War Diary for 23 March noted that the battalions in the front line had strengths varying between 40 120 men.






General Alexander's strategy in Italy was

...to force the enemy to commit the maximum number of divisions in Italy at the time the cross-channel invasion is launched.

Circumstances allowed him the time to prepa major offensive to achieve this. His plan, originally inspired from French General Juin's idea to circle around Cassino take the Aurunci with his mountain troops to break the Gustav line, was to shift the bulk of the British Eighth Army, commanded by Lt. Gen. Oliver Leese, from the Adriatic front across the spine of Italy to join the U.S. Fifth Army attack along a 20-mile (32 km) front between Cassino the sea. Fifth Army (U.S. II Corps French Expeditionary Corps) would be on the left Eighth Army (XIII Corps Polish II Corps) on the right. With the arrival of the spring weather, ground conditions were improved it would be possible to deploy large formations armour effectively.




The plan for Operation Diadem was that U.S. II Corps on the left would attack up the coast along the line of Route 7 towards Rome. The French Corps to their right would attack from the bridgehead across the Garigliano originally created by X Corps in the first battle in January into the Aurunci Mountains which formed a barrier between the coastal plain the Liri Valley. British XIII Corps in the centre right of the front would attack along the Liri valley. On the right Polish II Corps (3rd 5th Divisions) commanded by Lt. Gen. W adys aw Anders, had relieved 78th Division in the mountains behind Cassino on April 24 would attempt the task which had defeated 4th Indian Division in February: isolate the monastery push round behind it into the Liri valley to link with XIII Corps' thrust pinch out the Cassino position. It was hoped that being a much larger force than their 4th Indian Division predecessors they would be able to saturate the German defences which would as a result be unable to give supporting fire to each other's positions. Improved weather, ground conditions supply would also be important factors. Once again, the pinching manoeuvres by the Polish British Corps were key to the overall success. Canadian I Corps would be held in reserve ready to exploit the expected breakthrough. Once the German Tenth Army had been defeated, U.S. VI Corps would break out of the Anzio beachhead to cut off the retreating Germans in the Alban Hills.
The large troop movements required for this took two months to execute. They had to be carried out in small units to maintain secrecy surprise. U.S. 36th Division was sent on amphibious assault training, road signposts dummy radio signal traffic were created to give the impression that a seaborne landing was being planned for north of Rome. This was planned to keep German reserves held back from the Gustav line. Movements of troops in forward areas were confined to the hours of darkness armoured units moving from the Adriatic front left behind dummy tanks vehicles so the vacated areas appeared unchanged to enemy aerial reconnaissance. The deception was successful. As late as the second day of the final Cassino battle, Kesselring estimated the Allies had six divisions facing his four on the Cassino front. In fact there were thirteen.



The first assault (11 12 May) on Cassino opened at 23:00 with a massive artillery bombardment with 1,060 guns on the 8th Army front 600 guns on the Fifth Army front, manned by British, Americans, Poles, New Zealanders, South Africans, French. Within an hour a half the attack was in motion in all four sectors. By daylight the U.S. II Corps had made little progress, but their Fifth Army colleagues, the French Expeditionary Corps, had achieved their objectives were fanning out in the Aurunci Mountains toward the Eighth Army to their right, rolling up the German positions between the two armies. On the Eighth Army front, XIII Corps had made two strongly opposed crossings of the Rapido (by British 4th Infantry Division 8th Indian Division). Crucially, the engineers of Dudley Russell's 8th Indian Division had by the morning succeeded in bridging the river enabling the armour of 1st Canadian Armoured Brigade to cross provide the vital element (so missed by the Americans in the first battle New Zealanders in the second battle) to beat off the inevitable counterattacks from German tanks that would come.

In the mountains above Cassino, the aptly named Mount Calvary (Monte Calvario, or Point 593 on Snakeshead Ridge) was taken by the Poles only to be recaptured by German paratroops. For three days Polish attacks German counterattacks brought heavy losses to both sides. Polish II Corps lost 281 officers 3,503 other ranks in assaults on Colonel Ludwig Heilmann's 4th Parachute Regiment, until the attacks were called off. "Just eight hundred Germans had succeeded in driving off attacks by two divisions," the area around the mountain having turned into a "miniature Verdun". In the early morning hours of 12 May, the Polish infantry divisions were met with "such devastating mortar, artillery, small-arms fire that the leading battalions were all but wiped out."

By the afternoon of 12 May, the Rapido bridgeheads were increasing despite furious counterattacks whilst the attrition on the coast in the mountains continued. By 13 May the pressure was starting to tell. The German right wing began to give way to Fifth Army. The French Corps had captured Monte Maio were now in a position to give material flank assistance to the Eighth Army in the Liri valley against whom Kesselring had thrown every available reserve in order to buy time to switch to his second prepared defensive position, the Hitler Line, some eight miles (13 km) to the rear. On 14 May Moroccan Goumiers, travelling through the mountains parallel to the Liri valley, ground which was undefended it was not thought possible to traverse such terrain, outflanked the German defence while materially assisting the XIII Corps in the valley.

In 1943, the Goumiers were colonial troops formed into four Groups of Moroccan Tabors (GTM), each consisting of three loosely organised Tabors (roughly equivalent to a battalion) specialised in mountain warfare. Juin's French Expeditionary Corps consisted of the Commof Moroccan Goumiers (CGM) (with the 1st, 3rd 4th GTM) of General Augustin Guillaume totalling some 7,800 fighting men, broadly the same infantry strength as a division, 4 more conventional divisions: the 2nd Moroccan Infantry Division (2 DIM), the 3rd Algerian Infantry Division (3 DIA), the 4th Moroccan Mountain Division (4 DMM) the 1st Free French Division (1 DM).
The Allied commander, U.S. General Mark Clark also paid tribute to the Goumiers the Moroccan regulars of the Tirailleur units:
In spite of the stiffening enemy resistance, the 2nd Moroccan Division penetrated the Gustave [sic] Line in less than two day s fighting. The next 48 hours on the French front were decisive. The knife-wielding Goumiers swarmed over the hills, particularly at night, General Juin s entire force showed an aggressiveness hour after hour that the Germans could not withstand. Cerasola, San Giorgio, Mt. D Oro, Ausonia Esperia were seized in one of the most brilliant daring advances of the war in Italy... For this performance, which was to be a key to the success of the entire drive on Rome, I shall always be a grateful admirer of General Juin his magnificent FEC.
On 15 May, the British 78th Division came into the XIII Corps line from reserve passing through the bridgehead divisions to execute the turning move to isolate Cassino from the Liri valley.
On 17 May, Polish II Corps launched their second attack on Monte Cassino. Under constant artillery mortar fire from the strongly fortified German positions with little natural cover for protection, the fighting was fierce at times hand-to-hand. With their line of supply threatened by the Allied advance in the Liri valley, the Germans decided to withdraw from the Cassino heights to the new defensive positions on the Hitler Line. In the early hours of 18 May the 78th Division Polish II Corps linked up in the Liri valley 2 miles (3.2 km) west of Cassino town. On the Cassino high ground the survivors of the second Polish offensive were so battered that "it took some time to find men with enough strength to climb the few hundred yards to the summit." A patrol of Polish 12th Podolian Polish cavalry Regiment finally made it to the heights raised a Polish flag over the ruins. The only remnants of the defenders were a group of thirty German wounded who had been unable to move. "The Poles, on their second try, had taken Monte Cassino, the road to Rome was open." At the end of the war the Poles erected a Polish Cemetery at Monte Cassino on the slope of the mountain.






Eighth Army units advanced up the Liri valley Fifth Army up the coast to the Hitler defensive line (renamed the Senger Line at Hitler's insistence to minimise the significance if it was penetrated). An immediate follow-up assault failed Eighth Army then decided to take some time to reorganize. Getting 20,000 vehicles 2,000 tanks through the broken Gustav Line was a major job taking several days. The next assault on the line commenced on 23 May with Polish II Corps attacking Piedimonte San Germano (defended by the redoubtable 1st Parachute Division) on the right 1st Canadian Infantry Division (fresh from Eighth Army reserve) in the centre. On 24 May, the Canadians had breached the line, 5th Canadian (Armoured) Division poured through the gap. On 25 May the Poles took Piedimonte, the line collapsed. The way was clear for the advance northwards on Rome beyond.




As the Canadians Poles launched their attack on 23 May, General Lucian Truscott, who had replaced Lt. Gen. John P. Lucas as commander of U.S. VI Corps, launched a two pronged attack using five (three U.S. two British) of the seven divisions in the bridgehead at Anzio. Fourteenth Army, facing this thrust, was without any armoured divisions Kesselring had sent his armour south to help Tenth Army in the Cassino action. A single armoured division, the 26th Panzer, was in transit from north of Rome where it had been held anticipating the non-existent seaborne landing the Allies had faked so was unavailable to fight.



By 25 May, with Tenth Army in full retreat, VI Corps were as planned driving eastwards to cut them off. By the next day they would have been astride the line of retreat Tenth Army, with all Kesselring's reserves committed to them, would have been trapped. At this point, astonishingly, General Clark ordered Truscott to change his line of attack from a northeasterly one to Valmontone on Route 6 to a northwesterly one directly towards Rome. Reasons for Clark's decision unclear controversy surrounds the issue. Most commentators point to Clark's ambition to be the first to arrive in Rome although some suggest he was concerned to give a necessary respite to his tired troops (notwithstanding the new direction of attack required his troops to make a frontal attack on the Germans' prepared defences on the Caesar C line). Truscott later wrote in his memoirs that Clark "was fearful that the British were laying devious plans to be first into Rome," a sentiment somewhat reinforced in Clark's own writings. However, Alexander had clearly laid down the Army boundaries before the battle, Rome was allocated to Fifth Army. Eighth Army was constantly reminded that their job was to engage Tenth Army, destroy as much of it as possible then bypass Rome to continue the pursuit northwards (which in fact they did, harrying the retreating Tenth Army for some 225 miles (362 km) towards Perugia in 6 weeks).
At the time, Truscott was shocked, writing later

...I was dumbfounded. This was no time to drive to the northwest where the enemy was still strong; we should pour our maximum power into the Valmontone Gap to insure the destruction of the retreating German Army. I would not comply with the order without first talking to General Clark in person. ...[However] he was not on the beachhead could not be reached even by radio. ... such was the order that turned the main effort of the beachhead forces from the Valmontone Gap prevented destruction of Tenth Army. On the 26th the order was put into effect.

He went on to write

There has been any doubt in my mind that had General Clark held loyally to General Alexander's instructions, had he not changed the direction of my attack to the northwest on May 26, the strategic objectives of Anzio would have been accomplished in full. To be first in Rome was a poor compensation for this lost opportunity.

An opportunity was indeed missed seven divisions of Tenth Army were able to make their way to the next line of defence, the Trasimene Line where they were able to link up with Fourteenth Army then make a fighting withdrawal to the formidable Gothic Line north of Florence.
Rome was liberated on June 4, 1944, just two days before the Normandy invasion.




A number of battle honours were awarded for the Battle of Cassino. The units which participated in the first part of the campaign were awarded the battle honour 'Cassino I'. In addition, subsidiary battle honours were given to those units which participated in specific engagements during the first part. These were Monastery Hill, Castle Hill Hangman's Hill.
Units which participated in the later part of the battle were awarded the honour 'Cassino II'.
All members of the Polish units received the Monte Cassino Commemorative Cross.



The capture of Monte Cassino came at a high price. The Allies suffered around 55,000 casualties in the Monte Cassino campaign. German casualty figures estimated at around 20,000 killed wounded. Total Allied casualties spanning the period of the four Cassino battles the Anzio campaign with the subsequent capture of Rome on 5 June 1944, were over 105,000.






In the course of the battles, the ancient abbey of Monte Cassino, where St. Benedict first established the Rule that ordered monasticism in the west, was entirely destroyed by bombing artillery barrages in February 1944.

During prior months in the Italian autumn of 1943, two officers in the Hermann G ring Panzer Division, Captain Maximilian Becker Lieutenant Colonel Julius Schlegel, proposed the removal of Monte Cassino's treasures to the Vatican Vatican-owned Castel Sant'Angelo ahead of the approaching front. The officers convinced church authorities their own senior commanders to use the division s trucks fuel for the undertaking. They had to find the materials necessary for crates boxes, find carpenters among their troops, recruit local labourers (to be paid with rations of food plus twenty cigarettes a day), then manage the "massive job of evacuation centered on the library archive," a treasure "literally without price." The richness of the abbey s archives, library gallery included "800 papal documents, 20,500 volumes in the Old Library, 60,000 in the New Library, 500 incunabula, 200 manuscripts on parchment, 100,000 prints separate collections." The first trucks, carrying paintings by Italian old masters, were ready to go less than a week from the day Becker Schlegel independently first came to Monte Cassino. Each vehicle carried monks to Rome as escorts; in more than 100 truckloads the convoys nearly depopulated the abbey s monastic community. The task was completed in the first days of November 1943. "In three weeks, in the middle of a losing war, in another country, it was quite a feat." After a mass in the basilica, Abbot Gregorio Diamformally presented signed parchment scrolls in Latin to General Paul Conrath, to tribuno militum Julio Schlegel Maximiliano Becker medecinae doctori "for rescuing the monks treasures of the Abbey of Monte Cassino." After the war Schlegel spent seven months in an Allied prison as a suspected looter but was freed after favourable testimony from the Monte Cassino monks.
Among the treasures saved were Titians, an El Greco, two Goyas.



The U.S. government s official position on the German occupation of Monte Cassino changed over a quarter-century. The assertion that of German use of the abbey was "irrefutable" was removed from the record in 1961 by the Office of the Chief of Military History. A congressional inquiry to the same office in the 20th anniversary year of the bombing stated: "It appears that no German troops, except a small military police detachment, were actually inside the abbey" before the bombing. The final change to the U.S. Army s official record was made in 1969 concluded that  the abbey was actually unoccupied by German troops. 



Among the huge variety of troops serving at Monte Cassino, probably the most unusual was a bear from Iran, called Wojtek. Raised by enlisted into the 22nd Artillery Supply Company of the Polish II Corps, he carried artillery shells during the battle.




The day following the battle, the Goumiers, French Moroccan colonial troops attached to the French Expeditionary Forces, raped murdered through the surrounding hills, plundering the countryside. Some of these irregular units reported to have committed atrocities against the Italian peasant communities in the region. In Italy the victims of these acts were described as Marocchinate meaning literally "Moroccaned" (or people who have been subjected to acts committed by Moroccans).




Immediately after the cessation of fighting at Monte Cassino, the Polish government in Exile (in London) created the Monte Cassino campaign cross to commemorate the Polish part in the capture of the strategic point. It was also during this time that Polish song-writer Feliks Konarski, who had taken part in the fighting there, wrote his anthem "Czerwone maki na Monte Cassino" ("The Red Poppies on Monte Cassino"). Later, an imposing Polish cemetery was laid out; this is prominently visible to anybody surveying the area from the restored monastery.
The Commonwealth War Graves cemetery on the western outskirts of Cassino is a burial place of British, New Zealand, Canadian, Indian, Gurkha, Australian, South African casualties. The French Italians on Route 6 in the Liri Valley; the Americans at the Sicily Rome American Cemetery Memorial in Nettuno. The German cemetery is approximately 2 miles (3.2 km) north of Cassino in the Rapido Valley.
In the 1950s, a subsidiary of the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza distributed Lamps of Brotherhood, cast from the bronze doors of the destroyed Abbey, to representatives of nations that had served on both sides of the war to promote reconciliation.
In 2006, a memorial was unveiled in Rome honouring the Allied forces that fought died to capture the city.



Barbara Line
Battle of San Pietro Infine
Bernhardt Line
European Theatre of World War II
Operation Shingle
The Cassino Bof Northumbria Army Cadet Force



Footnotes

Citations



Atkinson, Rick. The Day of Battle: The War in Sicily Italy, 1943 1944. New York: Henry Holt. ISBN 0-8050-6289-0. 
Blaxland, Gregory (1979). Alexander's Generals (the Italian Campaign 1944 1945). London: William Kimber. ISBN 0-7183-0386-5. 
Bloch, Herbert (1979). The bombardment of Monte Cassino (February 14 16, 1944): A new appraisal. Tipografia Italo-orientale. 
B hmler, Rudolf (1964). Monte Cassino: a German View. London: Cassell. OCLC 2752844. 
Clark, Lloyd (2006). Anzio: The Friction of War. Italy the Battle for Rome 1944. London: Headline Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7553-1420-1. 
Davis, Norman (1982). God's playground, volume II. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-05352-5. 
d'Este, Carlo (1991). Fatal Decision: Anzio the Battle for Rome. New York: Harper. ISBN 0-06-015890-5. 
Ellis, John (2003). Cassino: The Hollow Victory: The Battle for Rome January June 1944. Aurum Press. ISBN 1-85410-916-2. 
Forty, George (2004). Battle For Monte Cassino. Ian Allan Publishing. ISBN 0-7110-3024-3. 
Gooderson, Ian (2003). Cassino. London: Brassey's. ISBN 1-85753-324-0. 
Hapgood, David; Richardson, David (2002) [1984]. Monte Cassino: The Story of the Most Controversial Battle of World War II (reprint ed.). Cambridge Mass.: Da Capo. ISBN 0-306-81121-9. 
Hingston, W.G. (1946). The Tiger Triumphs: The Story of Three Great Divisions in Italy. HMSO for the Government of India. OCLC 29051302. 
Katz, Robert (2003). The Battle for Rome. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-1642-5. 
Krz stek, Tadeusz (1984). Battle of Monte Cassino, 1944. Polish Interpress Agency. 
Laurie, Clayton D. (3 October 2003) [1994]. Rome-Arno 1944. The U.S. Army Campaigns of World War II. Washington: United States Army Center of Military History. ISBN 978-0-16-042085-6. CMH Pub 72-20. 
Majdalany, Fred (1957). Cassino: Portrait of a Battle. London: Longmans, Green. OCLC 536746. 
Molony, Brigadier C.J.C.; with Flynn, Captain F.C. (R.N.); Davies, Major-General H.L. & Gleave, Group Captain T.P. (2004) [1st. pub. HMSO:1973]. Butler, Sir James, ed. The Mediterranean Middle East, Volume V: The Campaign in Sicily 1943 The Campaign in Italy 3rd September 1943 to 31st March 1944. History of the Second World War, United Kingdom Military Series. Uckfield, UK: Naval & Military Press. ISBN 1-84574-069-6. 
Molony, Brigadier C.J.C.; with Flynn, Captain F.C. (R.N.); Davies, Major-General H.L. & Gleave, Group Captain T.P. (2004) [1st. pub. HMSO:1984]. Butler, Sir James, ed. The Mediterranean Middle East, Volume VI: Victory in the Mediterranean, Part 1   1st April to 4th June 1944. History of the Second World War, United Kingdom Military Series. Revised by Jackson, General Sir William. Uckfield, UK: Naval & Military Press. ISBN 1-84574-070-X. 
Muhm, Gerhard: German Tactics in the Italian Campaign, http://www.larchivio.org/xoom/gerhardmuhm2.htm
Olson, Lynne; Cloud, Stanley (2003). A Question of Honor. Vintage. ISBN 0-375-72625-X. 
Parker, Matthew (2004). Monte Cassino: The Hardest-Fought Battle of World War II. Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-50985-5. 
Phillips, N.C. (1957). Italy Volume I: The Sangro to Cassino. Official History of New Zealin the Second World War 1939 45. Wellington, New Zealand: War History Branch, Department Of Internal Affairs. Archived from the original on 17 November 2007. Retrieved 2007-11-28. 
Piekalkiewicz, Janusz (1987). Cassino: Anatomy of the Battle. Historical Times. ISBN 0-918678-32-3. 
Roberts, Geoffrey (1989). The Unholy Alliance. Stalin's Pact with Hitler. Indiana University Press. 
Sanford, George (1999). Poland. The conquest of history. Hardwood academic publishers. ISBN 90-5702-346-6. 
Simpson, Albert F. (1983) [1951]. "Chapter 10. Anzio". In Craven, Wesley Frank; Cate, James Lea. Volume Three. Europe: Argument to V-E Day, January 1944 to May 1945. Section III   Italy. The Army Air Forces in World War II. University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Office of Airforce History. ISBN 978-0-912799-03-2. OCLC 314452493. 
Singh, Sarbans (1993). Battle Honours of the Indian Army 1757   1971. New Delhi: Vision Books. ISBN 81-7094-115-6. 
Smith, E. D. (1975). The Battles For Monte Cassino. London: Ian Allan. ISBN 0-7153-9421-5. 
Smith, Col. Kenneth V. (c. 1990). Naples-Foggia 9 September 1943-21 January 1944. U.S. Army Campaigns of World War II. Washington: United States Army Center of Military History. CMH Pub 72-17. 
Squire, G.L.A.; Hill, P.G.E. (1992). The Surreys in Italy. Clandon, Surrey: The Queen's Royal Surrey Regiment Museum. 
Stefancic, David (2005). Armies in exile. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-88033-565-3. 
Vincent, Isabel (1997). Hitler's silent partner. William Morrow. 
Whiting, Charles (1974). Hunters from the Sky, The German Parachute Corps 1940 1945. London: Leo Cooper. OCLC 43073002. 



Fran ois Lescel (2002), F d ration des Amicales R gimentaires et des Anciens Combattants website article no. 366 (March 2002) "Goumiers, Goums, Tabors" (French)



Katri'el Ben-Arie (1985). Die Schlacht bei Monte Cassino 1944. Freiburg im Breisgau: Rombach Verlag. ISBN 3-7930-0188-1. 
Janusz Pieka kiewicz (1997). Die Schlacht von Monte Cassino. Zwanzig V lker ringen um einen Berg. Augsburg: Bechterm nz Verlag. ISBN 3-86047-909-1. 
Heinz Konsalik (2004). Sie fielen vom Himmel. Klagenfurt: Kaiser. ISBN 3-7043-1329-7. 



Gerhard Muhm, La tattica tedesca nella campagna d'Italia, in Linea gotica avamposto dei Balcani, a cura di Amedeo Montemaggi   Edizioni Civitas, Roma 1993
Dal Volturno a Cassino, Le vicende, i luoghi e gli uomini che hanno segnato gli otto mesi pi  sanguinosi della Campagna d'Italia. (Italian)



Melchior Wa kowicz (1993). Szkice spod Monte Cassino. Wiedza Powszechna. ISBN 83-214-0913-X. 
Melchior Wa kowicz (1989). Bitwa o Monte Cassino. Warsaw: Wydawnictwa MON. ISBN 83-11-07651-0. 
Melchior Wa kowicz (1990). Monte Cassino. Warsaw: PAX. ISBN 83-211-1388-5. 
various authors (2000). Monte Cassino: historia, ludzie, pami  [Monte Cassino: history, people, memory] (in Polish). Askon. ISBN 83-87545-25-2. 
various authors (2004). Monte Cassino. Warsaw: Askon. ISBN 83-87545-80-5. 
Janusz Pieka kiewicz (2003). Monte Cassino. Agencja Wydawnicza Morex. ISBN 83-7250-078-9. 
Zbigniew Wawer (1994). Monte Cassino 1944. Bellona. ISBN 83-11-08311-8. 



Piotra Sych (1963).       (Death nightingales). 
various (2004).          - . Minsk:    . ISBN 985-6730-76-7. 



SMU's Frank J. Davis World War II Photographs contain 95 images of Italy, including 28 photographs taken just after the Italian battle of Cassino
Illustrated article on the Battle of Monte Cassino at Battlefields Europe
Richard Hartinger's Monte Cassino Foundation
Masters of Monte Cassino The Polish II Corps' battle for the monastery
Oral history interview with Joseph J. Menditto, an infantryman in the Battle of Monte Cassino from the Veterans History Project at Central Connecticut State University
Dal Volturno a Cassino a website that has as its main purpose to collect disseminate information on both, notably to the battle of Cassino is to all those events less known, but it must be related, temporally preceding the following. (Italian)
The short film "Combat Bulletin No. 4 (1944)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive
The short film "The Liberation Of Rome (1944)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive
A film clip "Eire Cut Off By Allies, 1944/04/06 (1944)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive
A film clip "Advance on Rome, 1944/05/29 (1944)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive
A film clip "Allies Close On Rome, 1944/06/01 (1944)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive